Okay so lets have a look at that short cut
that I mentioned in the previous video.
So we're gonna go ahead and create a new python file.
So I'm going to right click, new, select python file.
We'll call this one contacts2.
Then let's go back to the orignal contacts profile
that we created in the previous video,
and just copy the first three lines
including the second line which is blank.
Paste that in there.
Then I'm gonna close down this rom window.
And let's double click that
so we've got a full screen there.
Alright, so at the moment we've got
the import and we're opening the contacts.sqlite.
Now sometimes cursors are useful,
and again we used a cursor in the previous video,
and we will be using those a little later.
But in the scenario where you just want to iterate
over the resulting data set,
python allows you to execute queries using the connexion
without having to create a cursor.
So let's look at how to do that.
So we've still got our connexion.
On line five I've gotta type, for row in db.execute
and select, and that is how
now that intellij is helping us
with these commands, so I can just press enter there,
select, star, type in F,
and then it comes up with from for us automatically.
Press enter there,
and then the actual table name which on it was contacts.
And print row.
So you can see we haven't used a cursor there.
Then lastly I'll just close the data base off.
Right so, that's an alternative.
And when you go to run this remember to right click it first
and choose run contacts2,
so that you're running this python script
and not the original one.
So if I run this, you're probably expecting
to see the two rows printed out.
So if we actually run it now we'll see the two rows
and in fact, they're not printed.
So at this point you might be checking a code,
or looking at the screen and wondering,
you know trying to work out what's going on
and why nothing's printed.
And you might even wanna launch a terminal session
or command prompt and check the data base
with the command line shell,
but I won't bother because there's nothing in it.
Now, reason is that when you make changes to a table,
using insert, update or delete statements,
nothing's made permanent,
until you commit the changes.
Now, some commands were forced the data to be committed,
and we're looking at things like bulk update
and sequel scripts a bit later,
but it's not a good idea generally to rely on that behaviour.
So the problem we've got is nothing to do
with the code in this programme,
it's because we didn't commit the changes
in our previous script.
So our insert statements were rolled back
when we closed the data base.
And looking at that other code,
if you think about it
it does make sense because when we run this programme,
we run it now,
this is running the contacts and not the contacts2,
it's showing two records and every time I run it,
it's only showing the two records.
Well it's actually showing none as the third record,
but the point is we've got these insert statements
on line five and six,
so if it was inserting records every time we run it,
we would have many more records
than actually what we've got showing,
which is only those two.
So, the reason for this is that sqlite wraps things
like inserts and deletions in a transaction.
Which is something that is very common in data base systems.
The idea is that the entire transaction can be rolled back
if something goes wrong.
Now that's actually an incredibly useful feature.
So in a banking application for example,
you don't want to debit one account
unless the paying account is also credited.
So if something goes wrong between the two updates,
money will go into the account being debited,
but wouldn't be taken out of the other account,
and that's good for the holder of the other account
but not very good for the bank.
So typically, the two updates will be performed
in a transaction.
Now the transaction is only committed if nothing goes wrong.
Now if there's an error in either update in this scenario,
the entire transaction would be rolled back.
So if the bank debited an account
and failed to take the money from the other account,
the bank would owe the money that transferred.
By the way if you're thinking I've got the terms
debit and credit the wrong way round,
your bank statements are produced
from the point of view of the bank.
So if your account's in credit,
that means the bank effectively owes you money.
And when you pay money in, the bank debits your account
and credits theirs with the corresponding amount.
So from their point of view,
their account with you is in credit,
and they owe you money.
As a programmer you may well have to work on
financial systems so,
bear in mind that the way we learn to use debit and credit,
from having a bank account
is actually the other way round in accounting.
Alright, back to python.
So there's nothing in our contacts table,
because we didn't commit the inserts
in the previous programme which I've now got on screen,
our contacts.py.
So let's actually add a line to that script now,
to commit the changes before we close the data base.
So where we do that is,
in between the cursor.close and the db.close,
so we type in db.commit, obviously parenthesis
because it's a function.
Alright so now if I right click it,
making sure I'm running contacts and not contacts2,
and run it.
We still get the same output,
but this time the data has actually been committed
to the table.
So there's two important things we've seen here.
The first is that it's crucial to commit any changes
that you make to the data base,
if you want those changes to be persistent.
If you fail to commit the changes,
they'll be lost when you close the connexion.
Now you will forget at some point,
but at least now you won't spend hours,
or hopefully won't spend hours trying to debug your code.
You'll actually realise straight away
that you didn't commit the changes
and you can add the commit to your code,
run your test again and then move on.
Alright the second thing, is that shortcut I mentioned.
Very often we're not interested in a cursor,
and I'll just go back to contacts2 pyscript.
Now cursors can be very useful,
but if you just wanna run a query
and loop through the results,
then you can execute the query using the connexion
as I showed, without explicitly creating the cursor.
So the connexions execute method does return a cursor
when you execute a select statement,
but you don't have to worry about explicitly defining one.
And we can actually unpack the cursors tuples,
just like we did in the previous programme.
Right firstly let's just run this in this scenario first.
So I'm running contacts2 now and making sure
that contacts2 is selected here.
And we're now getting some output,
and that's because in the other script
we've committed the change.
So that's one way of doing it but as I mentioned
we can also unpack the cursors tuple.
So we can do something like this instead.
So for name in, we'll change this here to,
for,
name,
phone,
email in db.execute
and that remains the same, the rest of the line,
and instead we'll have print name,
print phone,
print email,
and let's add a separator as well so print,
little typo there,
and we'll print as mentioned a separator,
times 20, and we can run that.
And you can see we've got the two unpacked tuples.
And note here that I haven't called db.commit,
and the reason for that is we haven't actually written
anything to the data base with this file,
with this python script, so there's no changes to commit.
Now we may have only saved two lines of code
over the previous programme,
but every line on a code you don't write
is one less code you have to debug.
So this short cut I think is very useful.
More importantly, because it's available
you'll almost certainly come across it in production code
that you may have to maintain.
So you may decide that you'll always create a cursor
because it's clearer, what's going on,
but learning to programme isn't just about
learning to write code,
but also about learning to read it.
Now it's often been said that code is read
ten times as often as it's written.
Now I'm not gonna comment on statistics like that,
but I can confirm that I've read far more code
than I've written,
and a lot of the has been my own code.
So in other words, I've written it once
then read it many times afterwards,
when maintaining the programmes and adding new features.
Okay, so we can execute queries using the connexion
as you saw here,
rather than explicitly creating a cursor,
and we saw that right at the start
when we created a table and inserted new records into it.
Now we could have created a cursor to execute
the create table state with incidentally,
but it probably doesn't make sense to do that.
For certain update statements it can make sense
to use a cursor,
even though we won't be getting back any rows
from the data base.
And that's because cursors have a row count property,
that we can use to check how many rows were affected
by the previous sequel statement.
So let's actually see how that works,
by performing an update in this contacts2 pyscript.
So what we're gonna do is make a change here now,
and I'm gonna add an update,
I'm gonna add this starting on line five,
update
underscore
s-q-l
equals
update
contacts
set
email
equals,
and a single quote because we've already got
a double quoted string,
update@update.com,
single quote,
where, contacts
dot phone
equals 1234.
So hopefully you recognise the standard sequel code
we're using now.
Right then we want update
underscore cursor is equal to db.cursor,
and update_cursor
dot execute,
update sql,
which is the sequel code that we want to execute.
And then we'll print out print,
double quote, curly braces
left and right curly braces, rows updated
dot format,
then update_cursor
dot
rowcount,
and then we wanna close the connexion so update_cursor,
or the cursor I should say, I said connexion,
update_cursor.close,
and then we'll leave the rest of the code there as it was.
So here I've stored the sequel statement
in the string variable update underscore sequel,
then created a cursor and used it to execute
the sequel statement.
Now because we've used a cursor,
we can check the row count property
to see how many rows were updated.
So if we actually run this,
we can see in the output one row's updated,
and we can also see the record that was updated
with the phone number of 1234,
has now got a new email address, update@update.com.
And just to confirm that,
if I change the condition over here
so that the phone number doesn't match any records on file,
we should get no rows updated so,
4567,
run this again,
zero rows updated as you can see.
Alright so dropping the where clause altogether,
just delete that actually,
and running that should result in all rows being updated.
Right so if I run that,
or where they actually updated?
Now this is actually a challenge
that I'm setting for you now.
Alright so that's the challenge again,
create a new python file here,
write the code to print out all the records
in the contacts.sqlite data base,
check the result and explain why
the records aren't as we'd expect them to be.
Pause the video, and I'll see you when you get back.
Alright so how did you get on?
Let's actually go through now with a solution
to this challenge.
I'm going to start by creating a new file,
new python file,
and we'll call this one
checkdb.
So I'll start with an import sqlite3.
I'll do a conn = sqlite3.connect
and contacts.sqlite,
as we've done before.
Then we put for, row, in, conn.execute,
select star from contacts,
print row,
conn
dot close.
Now your solution might be different to mine
you may have used a cursor,
or unpacked the rows tuples to print out the results,
for example,
but when I right click this,
and run it making sure I'm running checkdb,
notice how we've got the old records back again.
So each row's got a different email address,
even though we ran the update in the contacts2 script,
that was meant to actually have updated all the records
in the data base.
So in other words our previous update hasn't altered
the rows in the table.
Now the reason that the rows haven't been updated,
is that there was no commit in the contacts2 programme,
so when we closed the connexion the update was rolled back,
and the table's unchanged.
Now it's very easy to do that as I said,
and it was especially easy in contacts2,
and that's because we started off not needing
to commit anything,
when the programme only queried the data base.
Now you could automatically call commit before close
at the end of your programmes,
but I wouldn't necessarily recommend that,
and that's because the time to commit the updates
is once you're happy with the changes,
rather than leading it until you close the connexion.
So go back to contacts2,
we really should commit the changes after
performing the update.
Now something else I recommend is to use the cursor
to commit the changes, rather than the connexion.
Now cursor objects themselves don't have a commit method,
but they do have a connexion property
that we can use to get a reference to the connexion,
that the cursor's using.
So what we wanna do here is after the
print that says how many rows are updated,
this before the close,
we should actually put update
underscore cursor
dot connexion
dot
commit.
Like so.
So you might be asking at this point,
why is this better than calling db.commit?
Well in this small programme you really could use either.
The cursor connexions is db,
so calling commit on either one
will do exactly the same thing,
and we can see all the code on the screen at the same time,
but as your programmes get more complex,
you'll start creating functions or classes
to deal with things like updates and inserts,
and when you start doing that,
your functions may have a cursor object to work with
but won't necessarily know about the programmes connexion.
There's no need for them to know about the connexion,
so it's tidier to use whatever connexion your cursor has.
Now you might also create more than one connexion
to the data base,
and calling the commit method on the wrong connexion
will introduce subtle bugs
that may be really hard to find.
The commit method doesn't give an error
if there's nothing to commit,
so calling it on the wrong connexion
will be a really hard bug to spot.
So for that reason I suggest using the cursors
connexion property, to get a reference to the connexion
that the cursor's using, and then call commit on that.
So just to be clear we are dealing with
exactly the same connexion here,
so let's actually look at our complete code again.
So you can see on line three,
we create a connexion to the data base
and we store it in db.
We then use that same db, that connexion on line six
to create the cursor,
so the cursor is using the connexion stored in db.
Now on line 10,
when we refer to update_cursor.connection,
that's exactly the same connexion
that we stored in the variable db,
and we can actually check that in fact,
we could actually do that after the print here.
We type in print, then print,
are connexions the same,
and dot format,
update
cursor
dot connexion
is equal to db.
Then we do another print there.
Let's just try running that.
You can see, are connexions the same true.
So if you make changes to your data base using a cursor,
I really do suggest you call the commit method
by using the cursors connexion property.
That way your code won't have to care about
which connexion to use,
and you'll always get the correct one
because it's using the cursors connexion property.
Now of course, if you didn't use a cursor
to perform the update,
so if you've used the connexions execute method
like we did in the previous contacts.py programme
then you'd have to actually call commit
using the connexion.
Right so let's just run this.
And if you go back to our checkdb again, and run that,
we can verify that the records this time
have actually been updated.
Alright so there's a couple more things
I wanna cover before we move on.
One thing we need to look at is the email address
that we've hard coded in the update sequel string.
Over here.
Now there's actually a better way of doing that.
So we're gonna look at place holders
and parameter substitution to handle things like this,
and I've also talked about commit,
but I haven't shown you what to do
if you decide you shouldn't commit the transaction.
So we're gonna be talking about
and seeing how to roll back an update.
So I'm gonna stop the video here,
and in the next video we're gonna use
parameter substitution in our sequel statements.
After that we're going to leave databases briefly
and have a look at exceptions in python.
Once we know how to use exceptions
to detect that something's gone wrong,
we can see how to roll back our transactions.
So I'll see you as always, in the next video.